This research project was completed by myself and four other UNSW students studying data science as an assignment for the course MATH3821: Statistical modelling and computing. 

For this report we will be assessing the baseball data set, which addresses the 1986 salaries and performances of North American Major League Baseball players. The data set was obtained from the ASA 1988 Data Exposition, with the corrections and revisions incorporated. Our main objective is to determine the key performance drivers of baseball hitters and how they contribute to their salaries. 

For the purpose of our analysis, we will primarily be focusing on numerical variables and will be excluding most qualitative variables such as hitter’s name, league, division and team, unless we find valid reasons to include them. For the analysis we attempted a Linear Model, Generalised Linear Model (GLM) and Generalised Additive Model to understand which variables were significant in determining our question.

Results: Overall, we find that these variables were significant across at least two of the models: number of walks in 1986 (BB_1986), years spent in the major leagues (years), number of hits during their career (H_career), and put outs in 1986 (Put_outs_1986). Therefore, we deem these predictor variables to be important performance drivers that contribute to a baseball hitter’s salary in 1986. Overall, the model that best fit was the GLM due to its simplicity (in comparison to the GAM) while still being able to correctly identify significant variables.